======================================================
Espra - 24 Concepts for Changing the Web and the World
======================================================

Who Are We?
===========

ESP (officially ESP Metanational LLP) is the organisational representation of
the "Espians" -- a metanational tribe of cultural creatives working towards a
loosely defined vision of "Espia".


Meta
====

The 24 Days project is structured around the QAC (Question, Answer, Challenge)
methodology. On each day:

* A question is asked of the world -- inviting as many answers as possible

* An answer is proposed by us (the Espians)

* A challenge is put forward for the world to meet within the course of the 24
  days if they feel our answer fitting

The meta question we are asking is: **How do we enable people?**

As an answer we are proposing **Espra**, a new service we are launching. During
the 24 days, different aspects of Espra will be explored as part of our answer
to the day's question -- all intending to be enabling.

The meta challenge -- if people feel Espra to be enabling and its social,
financial and innovative aspects compelling enough -- is to invest Â£24 million
of seed funding to develop Espra further.


Trust Maps
==========

:Answers: How do we overcome information overload?
:Challenge: Have 1 million people using trust maps

Espra provides trust maps as a mechanism for improving the quality of search
results based on who you know and how much you trust them on particular
subjects.

Example:

  A person (Peter) trusts another person (Mary) on a subject (Cars), so Mary
  enters Peter's trust map for any car-related subjects. When another person
  (Rudolph) does a search for something related to cars, if Peter is in his
  trust map the search will include results from those people who are in Peter's
  trust map on the subject of cars such as Mary.


Augmented Live/Work Spaces
==========================

:Answers: How do we improve our work spaces?

Society is changing, people are exploring new ways of living and working in the
quest for personal fulfilment and development. The age of the network expands
the possibilities for working and living. By using the collective intelligence
of the Espra network, we can create live/work spaces that enable a better way of
living, one with a higher quality of life, more sustainable and more rich in
relationships and community and therefore richer in meaning.

Imagine walking in to a place where Espra knows that there are people who share
your interests and/or contacts and facilitates a meeting by texting your phone
to alert you to this. This is just one of the ways that Espra can augment the
places we live and work. Another is that these places can also be dropoff/pickup
points or destinations for trust-based transportation.


Smart Provisioning
==================

Everybody buys certain goods on a regular basis, such as food. So instead of
repeatedly making orders for the same goods over and over again, you should be
able to subscribe to them in the same way that you can subscribe to services. If
you buy the same stuff from your retailer of choice every week, why can't they
just offer the same order to you again? Basically, they can prompt you in
advance if you want your standard order or do you want to make changes, that way
they always have your permission and knowledge before they ship the goods. This
makes shopping for essentials more of a pleasure than a chore. Espra enables
this form of smarter shopping from vendors who are members of the Espra network,
so you can spend more time doing what really matters.


Ubiquitous Interfaces
=====================

Why do you need a keyboard or a PC to interact with the internet? Espra provides
various interfaces that enable you to interact with it in a suitable manner
regardless of location and what device you are using to connect with the
network. If you are connected by a mobile device, you can use gestures or voice
to interact with the network. If using a PC, you can use the traditional
keyboard and mouse if you wish.

One key aspect of the ubiquitous interfaces enabled by Espra is a software agent
that can act on your behalf. It has knowledge of your needs, wants, todo list,
address book and diary. As such, you can delegate certain tasks to it and it
will carry them out. It can also automatically take care of various arrangements
such as scheduling meetings based on your availability and location, referring
back to you when it needs a decision or permission from you. The agent can take
care of trivial details for you, allowing to you to focus on the important
things in your life. Over time the agent will become better at serving you,
based on its interaction with you and your usage of Espra making life easier
giving you your own personal assistant/secretary online.


Trust-routed Transportation
===========================

Espra allows you to avoid the use of expensive and inflexible delivery companies
by using your trustmap to arrange for delivery via members of the Espra network.
For example, if someone is making a car journey from Manchester to London on
business or pleasure, there is no reason they can't carry something extra in the
boot to a drop off point on their way from which it can be routed to its
destination. In fact, if they do a good job of it, they will be rewarded by a
boost in their reputation as well as receiving pecus for rendering the service.

For premium delivery services, where the goods in question are of a certain
value or fragility or must be delivered within a tight timeframe there will be
specialist service providers who can take responsibility for doing so. This will
no doubt include the traditional delivery companies who have chosen to become
members of the Espra network with all that entails.

Trust-routed transportation isn't just for the delivery of goods, it can also
form the basis of a next-generation of car pooling enabling personal travel over
increased distances without reliance on public transport or expensive commercial
travel services.


Contextual Summaries
====================

Given the increased quantity of information that living in the 21st century
requires us to deal with, Espra provides the facilities to enable the creation
and maintenance of high-quality summaries that provide various points of view
and are available in whatever form we might prefer e.g. text, audio, etc.


Mesh Identities
===============

Nicknames, nom de guerres, screen names, pen names and pseudonyms are the
predecessors for mesh identities. In literature, for example the writer Iain
Menzies Banks writes science fiction as Iain M. Banks whereas he writes literary
fiction as Iain Banks. This allows him to maintain separate identities as a
science fiction writer and as a "serious" writer. Another well-known example for
literature is Stephen King's use of the Richard Bachman pen name in order to
publish more than one book a year. There is a tradition for Hollywood film
actors to adopt a screen name, e.g. Archibald Leach became Cary Grant and Norma
Jean Baker became Marilyn Monroe.

Espra allows you to have multiple identities each with its own reputation and
trustmap. There are many useful applications of this, particularly in a
celebrity-obsessed culture where someone's fame can hinder their ability to
interact and transact in a normal manner. It also facilitates the handling of
certain sensitive matters in a secure and pseudonymous manner. It can also be a
way of safely expressing your multiple personas as you participate in various
communities of practice or interest. These mesh identities work with hive
intelligence (23) and swarm awareness(22).

Cultural Market Spaces
======================

People enjoy being in cafes, galleries and social spaces due to the relaxed
surroundings and the good company. Espra can augment these spaces in a similar
way to what it does for live/work spaces making them better places for leisure
and business. Such a space can add to its revenue-generating activities by
incorporating displays of appropriate and tasteful selected goods available via
the Espra network. The very taste that makes the spaces such good places to be,
can make them more financially successful and viable without tying up capital in
goods of uncertain saleability.


Unimessaging
============

There are many modes of communication available to us in this age depending on
our location and ability to connect to the internet and mobile networks. Espra
ensures that no matter where you are, you can get all your messages no matter
what form the message originated in and what communications medium you are
reachable by. So if you need to, you can get your email messages as voicemails
and vice-versa. Instant messages can be sent to you via SMS and you can respond
in the same manner. Espra will transparently convert messages to a suitable form
depending on how you are currently connected to the network by using Espra's
ubiquitous interfaces.


Peer-Based Education
====================

Education for the 21st century is evolving. Wikipedia shows us some of the
possibilities. Self-directed lifelong learning means that each of us will become
capable of both learning and teaching and in far more creative and collaborative
ways than traditional educational institutions currently allow and in ways that
foster social and communication skills.

Within Espra, members can receive PECUs for facilitating the learning of others.
It provides an alternative avenue for expertise to be recognised and rewarded.


Free Information Infrastructures
================================

With Espra, the value is in the network. It is therefore in the interest of
Espra and its members for as many people to be able to access the network as
possible, thus growing the network. Espra will therefore sponsor the deployment
of free wireless networks as widely as possible, benefiting from the resultant
activity on the network.


Augmented Dialogue
==================

We have conversations of various kinds in various places. Some of the most
important being those related to the common interest, traditionally regarded as
politics. Espra will enable enriched democratic conversations in public spaces
and new forms of conferences, augmented by contextual summaries and voting
systems amongst other things. As with many things enabled by Espra, the physical
world will be reflected in the virtual and vice-versa.

One form of augmented dialogue that will be enabled is collective journalism.
Everybody has a cameraphone these days and everyone has an point of view. Espra
enables people to report events that they have witnessed personally without
being filtered out by the traditional media establishment and publish those
reports globally in various formats in order to help to improve democracy and
accountablity.

Likewise, collaborative film making and music production/composition will also
be enabled by leveraging Espra's Collaborative Media Platform.


Neoguild Commerce
=================

Hiring professionals to carry out work such as plumbing and building is a
difficult matter. Espra allows professionals to be rated by their peers as
apprentices, journeymen and masters. This makes it easier to hire a professional
with an appropriate level of experience at an appropiate rate. Espra also helps
to improve the quality of the work by introducing a process of review of the
work done by another professional thus raising the standard of work done. The
hirer will be able to contribute his own rating of both the professional and the
reviewer, thus providing useful consumer information for future buyers of the
services.


Trust-Led Organisation Management
=================================

Espra enables new forms of decentralized organisation. In the trust-led
organisation management model, Espra members can participate in projects, select
the project tasks that they will work on and receive PECUs for accomplishing the
tasks. The PECUs in turn can be used to purchase goods and services on Espra,
fund projects and enable them to take part in project-related decision-making.


Reputation-Based Currencies
===========================

Espra's internal economy is based on PECUs (a form of reputation-based currency)
enabling Espra members to buy or sell goods and services on the network from
each other. Espra provides the mechanisms to enable members to create and
exchange their own reputation-based currencies for their own purposes. Amongst
other things, this will enable users of existing local currencies such as LETs
and Timebanks to bring their schemes online and into the Espra network and
provides them with an accounting system.


Spam-Free Advertising
=====================

Espra provides a new form of opt-in advertising where you only see adverts
relating to things you are interested in by filtering them via your trust map
and you actually get paid for viewing the adverts which changes the economics of
spam drastically by increasing its costs.


Multi-Party Bartering
=====================

Bartering is a money-free form of exchange. However, it is usually done in the
form of a straight swap between two parties. This is because of the time and
complexity involved in doing more complex barter transactions. Espra enables
complex, multi-party barter exchanges by exploiting the power of the network.


Tool Creator Toolkit
====================

Espra provides a toolkit that allows people to build and make available their
own tools on the Espra network. If you have ideas on how to make Espra better,
this will allow you or someone else to make those ideas a reality. This ensures
that over time, Espra will be more useful to you and more effectively serves
your needs. The toolkit enables the user to exploit the queryable structured
data on the network and build/reuse composable services.


Cultural Commons
================

Espra is a huge supporter of the public domain and is intent on a vast expansion
of it. It therefore provides tools and support for creating, storing and
searching public domain material,

Espra also sets aside a portion of its profits in the form of PECUs to create a
Commons Cultivation Fund. This will be available to support projects that
benefit the common welfare of humanity locally and/or globally. Criteria that
projects will have to meet include environmental sustainablity, social justice
and contribution to the public domain.


Peer Bazaar
===========

Espra ensures that bloggers and others that make recommmendations of value will
receive PECUs for doing so. This is done in a simple, easy to use way. A portion
of all transactions is contributed back to those who made the recommendations
that led to those transactions.


Collaborative Media Platform
============================

Imagine a cross between youtube and myspace that's on steroids. This gives you
an idea of the power of Espra's collaborative media platform. It enables people
to create, edit and share video/audio content collaboratively. It provides media
tools suitable for both professionals and amateurs.


Swarm Awareness
===============

Do you know what your family, friends and colleagues are doing right now? Espra
enables you to keep track what the people you care about are doing and their
whereabouts in a way that respects privacy, both theirs and yours on the basis
of given permissions and mesh identities. This allows for greater forms of
serendipity, so if for example a friend happens to be in the same area as the
same time, you are made aware of this and you can arrange to meet for a drink.


Hive Intelligence
=================

By aggregating the knowledge and intelligence of members of the network, Espra
enables the harnessing of a new form of hive intelligence. This can be used in
surprising ways such as prediction markets.


Ecology 1 Million
=================

In order to support ethical shopping and sustainable economic development, Espra
is supporting the creation of the Ecology 1 Million index which will only list
companies that meet the criteria regarding ethical trade and environmental
sustainablity. This provides assurance that Espra members are buying from
companies that are making a positive difference in the world by contributing to
the welfare of the Natural Commons we all depend on by conducting their business
in an ecologically sound manner.
